HADEAN EARTH- Earth is in its infancy, only a 10 million year old planet. The Earth’s surface is 3300 degrees Fahrenheit and covered by boiling hot magma. It is far too hot for solid rocks or oceans to form or life to exist.

COOLING EARTH- Earth has started to form its outer crust of basalt. Presently, basalt makes up 70% of the Earth's outer crust and all of Earth's ocean crust. Most of the surface rock on Mercury, Mars, and Venus is also made out of basalt.

BLUE OCEANS- Water in our large oceans is thought to have been derived from two major sources. Most of Earth's water originated from deep inside of the planet. It was expelled from volcanos and then condensed as rain. The remainder of ocean water is likely extraterrestrial in nature coming to Earth in the form of icy meteors.

GRANITE-PROTOCONTINENT- The foundation of Earth's large landmasses is made out of granite. Granite is less dense than basalt and rose above the basalt to form large blocks of land (cratons). Over time these cratons assembled to form Earth's first protocontinent, Ur.

KENORLAND-Kenorland was the first of five supercontinents in Earth's history. Around the Earth's 2 billionth birthday, oxygen levels in the atmosphere started to rise due to increased oxygen production by cyanobacteria or blue green algae. The oxygen caused Earth's rocks to rust and changed the Earth's surface from granite grey to brick red.

COLUMBIA-Earth’s second supercontinent was called Columbia. This landmass was located around the equator for over 300 million years. It measured 8000 miles from North to South. It was during this time period that the first eukaryotes appeared.

RODINIA- Rodinia was formed from the gradual accumulation of new land and collision of remnants of Columbia. The exact location of this supercontinent is not known. However, it is believed that the landmasses, which comprise present day Australia, India, and Antarctica, were once all north of the Equator.

SNOWBALL EARTH-Between the break-up of Rodinia and the formation of Gondwana, earth experienced a major ice age. At the height of this cold spell, Earth's entire surface was covered by ice or slush. A decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide and subsequent thinning of Earth's greenhouse layer allowed Earth’s heat to escape into space

GONDWANA-Gondwana was the largest piece of continental crust during the Paleozoic period. Unlike previous supercontinents, Gondwana had some vegetation on its surface. The first vascular land plant was called Cooksonia

PANGAEA-Earth's last supercontinent formed 300 million years ago. This huge landmass started to break up around 175 million years ago and producing today’s 7 continents. When Pangaea began to split apart, the Atlantic Ocean formed, Africa and South America separated, and Australia and Antarctica moved south. India broke off from the east coast of Africa, beginning its 50 million year journey northward in which it ultimately smashed into Asia forming the Himalayan mountains.

EARTH- The epic photo of the Earth on the wall was taken from the moon during the 1972 Apollo 17 space mission. The Earth is breathtakingly beautiful but appears isolated and fragile as it lies suspended in the middle of our Solar System. If you look closely you can identify some of Earth's landmasses.

NOVO PANGAEA- Earth's 6th supercontinent!! In 50 million years, Earth's surface will appear dramatically different than it does today. The Atlantic Ocean will enlarge, while the Pacific Ocean will shrink. Africa will move north, obliterating the Mediterranean Ocean. A massive mountain range, much higher than the Himalayas, will form in Southern Europe. Antarctica and Australia will move north.